OYATE POTTERY - in large font, centered - Fire background (all pages)
Centered under - PITFIRE  -  RAKU
Other info
facebook address?
email - OYATEPOTTERY@gmail.com
Robert Mohler
Chattanooga, TN
 
Page 2 - Contents
 
(Statement)  These last 17 years learning from a number of individual artists, I have concentrated my efforts in several of the more ancient firing methods. One of the great advantages of the methods here is the quick turnaround, which allows the artist to make changes on the fly and gain feedback without having to wait.  During my working career (sales), I was fortunate to travel the US extensively and made it a point to visit local studios where I could ask questions and share ideas.  With very few exceptions, the clay community has always been open to sharing ideas and methods.  Moreover, studios tend to be a happy, friendly environment. 
PITFIRE is certainly the oldest method of vitrifying clay, though modern ores and other additions have made this an excellent avenue for creative expression.  Pitfire can be as simple and easy as just cutting holes in a 50gal barrel (see page X for some general guidelines).
RAKU, in all its forms, remains my favorite glazing method.  The ability to control and manipulate time, temperature and glaze ingredients allows the artist a wide range of palletes.  In these RAKU sections, I have included NAKED RAKU, FERRIC CHLORIDE and standard RAKU.
  
Page 3 - 
RAKU (centered top)
The Raku method comes to us from Japan where it was a base glaze for tea ceremony pieces beginning approximately 1580.  Brought to the USA in the 1950s by Paul Soldner, RAKU glazes are many and varied.  RAKU is certainly my favorite method of glazing and the options available in glaze formulas and firing methods provide an ongoing challenge. 
 https://share.icloud.com/photos/07a-lbm1YGmDG_JBwxXF_fHFA




Page 4 
NAKED RAKU (centered top)
NAKED RAKU is definitely a different method from standard RAKU.  A thin slip covers a burnished pot which allows the patterns to be a result of smoke penetration and the result is unpredictable and dynamic.  This method requires close attention to the prep and firing conditions, but the results are well worth the effort.
https://share.icloud.com/photos/0f9Ij8QCFwpdZHMug6f2zennw 
PAGE 5
FERRIC CHLORIDE REDUCTION (centered top)
FERRIC CHLORIDE is extremely toxic, especially in aerosol form, so be aware that gloves and a respirator are definitely part of the process.  Much like PITFIRE, FERRIC CHLORIDE provides a great background color (pinkish red) and is further enhanced using nuts, salt, chlorides and discarded fruits and vegetables.
https://share.icloud.com/photos/0a11hFZniaehE0Rv7qz32M6gQ
Page 6
DRAGON'S BREATH
DRAGON'S BREATH is essentially the same process as RAKU.  The difference lies in the firing temperature, varying the temperature +/- 2-300 degrees (F) the results take on a different texture.  This is highly experimental and honestly produces its share of failures, buit the successful results can be stunning.
 https://share.icloud.com/photos/0eaEOc6-S0nlLIpqm90zbtHkQ
Page 7
PITFIRE
PITFIRE is the oldest method of firing clay and artifacts are nearly 30,000 years old.  This comes from a time when hunter-gatherers moved to agrarian societies   Most likely our ancestors left clay near a fire and when the hardened results were discovered, they provided a tool for storing grains and food products.  This method is varied and depends on the artist's choice of materials.  Salts, nut shells, natural organic materials, ores, copper wire and more provide fascinating results.
 
https://share.icloud.com/photos/0ablINlsT4LGRKOrEX7R2yKUg
Page 8
REFERENCE
 
Best books
Alternative Kilns and Firing Techniques by James Watkins & Paul Wandless
Pit Firing Ceramics by Dawn Whitehand
 
UTube
Anything by Don Ellis and Rady Brodnax